Whose turn is it to win next?
=============================

By Tan Gim Ean
--------------

Who will win the Anugerah Sasterah Negara for 1990?

All bets are that poet-scholar Muhammad Haji Salleh seems the likely man of letters to be accorded the nation's highest literary honour.

Indeed, the number of contenders this time is decidedly small. Word has it that the contest has dwindled to a two-horse race.

The other candidate is likely to be either playwright Noordin Hassan or fiction writer Abdullah Hussain.

Both of them, together with Muhammad, were the only nominees for 1989 but it was decided by the selection panel that no award would be given that year.

Given the stringent criteria of selecting a winner, the panel's cautious attitude towards giving the award is not at all surprising.

The winner has to be someone who has produced a body of good literary work, contributed intellectually to the development of national literature, and is still actively writing.

This, since its inception 10 years ago, the Anugerah Sastera Negara has only been awarded five times.

Keris Mas (1981), Shahnon Ahmad (1982), Usman Awang (1983), A. Samad Said (1985), and Arenawati (1988) have so far been the ones with track records considered worthy of recognition.

There are not many writers left who measure up to the criteria.

The Anugerah Sastera Negara was initiated by the ---------- in 1981 to honour ----------- novels, plays ---------------, in Bahasa ------------.

----------------------r, universities, --------------- organisations and -------------- of literary ----------------g are invited to --------------- minate candidates for the --------------ward.

Each nomination has to be accompanied by a bibliography of the candidate plus an in-depth paper on his work, explaining its contribution to the literary world and the development of national literature.

Selection of the winner is done by a panel chaired by the Education Minister. Dewan Bahasa dan Pustaka (DBP) is the secretariat for the award.

Considering the weight of their decision, the 12 panelists, including the chairman and secretary, are people well versed in literature.

The panel changes every three years.

The present one, which ends its term in September, comprises chairman Datuk Seri Anwar Ibrahim, secretary Anwar Ridhwan, and members Haji Jumaat Muhamad Noor (director-general of DBP), Taib Othman (acting Vice-Chancellor of Universiti Malaya), Prof Datuk Shahnon Ahmad (past winner and Universiti Sains Malaysia lecturer), Keris Mas (past winner), Omar Hashim (formerly of the Education Ministry), Baha Zain (writer-publisher), Lim Chee Seng (English Department of Universiti Malaya), and Krishen Jit (drama critic).

Every year, the panel meets to study the merits of each nominee. If no winner is declared, those who want their candidates to be considered for the next year have to renominate, following the same procedure.

But the panel also keeps track of all previous nominees and can suggest that a candidate be reviewed at a later time. So far, there have been less than five such panel nominations.

There were no winners in 1984, 1986, 1987 and 1989. In 1984, Samad Said, the sole nominee, rejected his nomination because he felt other writers should have been nominated as well. In the other years, the nominees were found to be ineligible.

It is believed that Muhammad was the only formal nominee for 1990. The panel then decided to propose a second nomination out of the other two it had received for 1989. The winner is expected to be announced by the Education Minister soon, probably after Hari Raya Puasa.

Besides being named a Sasterawan Negara, the recipient of the Anugerah Sastera Negara will received $30,000, to be entitled to first-class hospitalisation facilities, and have 50,000 copies of one of his works published at government expense and distributed to schools, libraries and other institutions.

As with all awards that are prestigious and carry a hefty prize, there are bound to be dissenters.

No one questions the diligent selection process. The panel has so far not been subject to any kind of pressure or controversy.

Still, some literary people begrudge the requirement that the winner must still be actively writing. They argue that writers who are past their prime should also be recognised for the good work they produced in the past.

Two veterans, Pak Sako (Ishak Haji Muhammad) and A. Samad Ismail, are examples mentioned.

However, the argument held against their winning the award is that they were more prolific as journalists, and that whatever literary works they produced do not measure up to the standards of quality.

"Even so, it should be noted that in Malay literature, there's a thin line between the literary man and the journalist," says Johan Jaaffar, head of the general publishing division of DBP.

"Pak Sako and Pak Samad were journalists who wrote literature with a message to promote. The message came first at the expense of literary merit. Literature then was brutal, bitter and extreme.

"For that reason, the worth of their contributions should be viewed in that context."

Various people feel the Anugerah Sastera Negara should be a biennial affair, to allow time for new writers to emerge and for existing ones to hone their craft and come out with works worthy of consideration.

One writer even questions the conferring of the award on Keris Mas and Arenawati.

He considers Keris Mas to be a writer of merely passable merit. As for Arenawati, he is basically a good story-teller whose best works are about the sea because he was once a sailor, and he is one of the country's most productive novelists.

"But there is not much aesthetic quality in his work, especially in his last trilogy, Sakura Mengorak Kelopak, Bunga Dari Kuburan and Kuntum Tulib Biru," he says.

"The plot of that trilogy is suspect, and there is evidence in the work itself suggesting that he wrote without much research. He shouldn't have won in 1988."

This assertion further reinforces the dilemma faced by the Anugerah Sastera Negara panel. With such doubt cast on its selection of what could be considered literary stalwarts, the field of potential future recipients must be even marrower.

One of the panelists feels there is a need now to consider the younger "second-generation" who started out in the 1960s.

"There are certainly no literary giants among this crop," he admits, "but there are about four or five who deserve consideration."

Source: New Straits Times, March 6, 1991, p. 21.

NOTE: Hyphenated spaces in the middle of article represent missing portions from the clipping. Probably due to the fact that I didn't transport the newspapers carefully enough.